We did a lot of practice coastal shooting.
You
said you'd shoot a lot of drones and stuff like
that, sleds. Beg your pardon? A lot of practice.
Practice, practice, practice every day. Okay.
That's all it was, was practice. Okay.
Were you eager to get overseas? A bit. Because here
we are in 1943, you don't get overseas until 1944.
That's right. The war starts for us in 1941. you
have all this training, I would imagine that being
a training officer might be a little frustrating
for a man that wanted to, a man who stayed in the
reserves during the 1930s. Well, okay, that's
right. I had my chance to go overseas and my good
friend
got me out of it, replaced me, and I'm here because
of it. But anyway, here, and
I stayed there until August 1, 1944, at Fort Meade.
And I was transferred to the
headquartered field artillery Fort Jackson,
South Carolina. Fort Jackson, South Carolina,
right. And you were the executive officer there in
1944. I was executive officer there. And was that
the same type job, more training? No, this was a
combat outfit. Oh, so you were preparing for
Europe? That was going to Europe, that's right.
And I went down there as the exec officer of the
group. OK, so now this is the first time in your
military career Now August 1, 1944 finally you are
assigned to go overseas and now Fort Jackson is a
deployment station basically. That's correct.
He got it in there. Then I was in the combat unit and
we trained for combat.
Here are another breaks that you get.
I was chaffing the bit and talking to every
artillery personnel officer I could talk to about
getting into combat. And of course, they always
say, well, just hold your horses. Just hold your
horses.
And my good commanding officer from Fort Sill days
was scheduled to go into combat all
middle of September, 44. He was down at, he was over
at Fort Rucker with an outfit that he had built up
and trained and he would get taken overseas. And
somehow he had
accumulated or acquired a
distrust of an executive officer. An executive
officer in the commanding officer got to be just
like a hand in glove. You got to think alike, and
squad alike, and run alike, and everything. And he
had acquired
a dislike for his executive officer.
And the night before they were supposed to ship out
of Fort Rucker, they had a party. This executive
officer got drunk.
And Colonel Mays, you know, kind of like Ford and
electric, like to pull the switch and right out it
comes on. So Colonel Mays had him put in the
hospital and went down there and talked with the
doctor, one of his old regular army buddies. He
said, you keep that son of a bitch in here. I'm
shipping out tomorrow, and I don't want him. So you
just keep him here for a week. under observation or
diagnosis or, you know, how doctors can do. And by
that time, we'd be gone. In other words, he just
cleaned his dirt and in right then. And he called
me, or had his
adjutant call me up at Camp Jackson and asked me if I
wanted to go overseas with Colonel Mays. I said,
hell yes, I want to go overseas with Colonel Mays.
Nobody that I'd like to go overseas more with. But
here, I'm an executive. It's outfit. And I don't
know whether I can get a lift from here or not. And he
said, now, you've got to go tomorrow. You've got to
leave there tonight so we can leave. We go from
Kilmer tomorrow. And he was the executive
officer, Colonel Walter Jenkins. And I'm sure
Colonel Mays was sitting there. He sat there and
did this all the time. Nervous habit he had
accumulated. I see him chewing on his thumbnail
right now. Who's his executive officer? Colonel
Walter Jenkins. Oh. Asked if he wants to go again.
Are you sure you want to go with Colonel Jenkins?
Hell yeah. Let me talk to Colonel Jenkins. And he
said, Walter, the old SOB, and they live next
quarter, some back 1925 or 30, see, and Back in the
old Army days, they were old, old Army people. So
the guy that was in the hospital was? No, this is my
then-Colonel. Oh, I see. And my old Colonel was
talking, and they were old buddies. Oh, I see. And
my Colonel, I mean Colonel Mays, said, now Walter,
I want the kid to go overseas with my executive.
You're not going to get stanged away, are you? You
know you want to go overseas, and that boy wants to
go overseas, so why don't you come on and let him go
overseas with me? Colonel Jenkins said, you want
to go overseas with Colonel Mays? I said, yes, sir.
Give him my right arm. He says, OK. That's all there
was to it. So I had about seven hours to get packed,
get on the plane, and fly to Camp Kilmer, which is
right out of New York. And I was gone. No kidding.
Yeah. And so there's another break. See, this
history that I built up at Fort Seal and
Leavenworth, Helping you all the time. Gave me
breaks. And these are the breaks I'm talking
about. That's why I got promoted so fast. That's
why I got overseas when I did. And so you joined,
then you joined the 407th Field Artillery Group
overseas. Well, I joined with Camp Kilmer, and we
were gone the next day. Yeah, for overseas. For
overseas. And you were the executive officer
there. I was an executive officer there. And this
is 1944. Yeah.
September
14, 1944.
And did you go to Britain first or did you go right
into France? No, we went into France. There again,
I was brand new to this outfit. I met them up there
and got to know them over one meal, you know, this
headquarters.
And, uh, They didn't know me, and I didn't know
them, and I'd just talk and pop it off.
Trying to get acquainted with them, except for
Colonel Mays, I didn't know any of them. And the old
man, and of course I soldiered with him for two and a
half, maybe off and on three years. I knew how he
thought, and he knew how I would react, and we'd get
along fine. I could see Owen, he's like, shoot.
Kidding these people about
what we're going to see overseas on. You know, all
rumors starting, and delivered ships, and
victory ships, and merchant marines, and going on
a garbage scowl. And I said, oh, hell, if you want
me, I'll get you on a first class ship. You know,
just talking. And we left Kilmer on a barge, went up
the river, East River or whatever it is. It was
driving rain, all of us out there on this damn
barge. It got soaking wet and everything. Went in
at water level and opened door and you could see
lights in there. Of course, they got doors down at
water level. And they had a man there checking
names, Colonel Lieutenant Colonel Gregory
Kibble checked my name off, and some fella grabbed
me by the shoulder and said, here, Colonel, you go
with me. Led me in to the elevator, and that was the
first time I knew that we were on the Queen
Elizabeth. Really? Yeah. So the next day or two, I
saw these people, and I asked them, I said, now, is
this first class enough for you? But I went
overseas on the elevator. Of course, We were an
emergency shipment. And we went off somewhere off
of Cherbourg, France. Got on a British liner, a
lighter they call them, which is a small ship. And
they took us into Omaha Beach, actually. That was,
oh heck, that was three months after D-Day. And by
that time, the engineers had built up ponton wharf
out on floating pontons. And we walked right off of
this ladder onto pontons and walked right down a
ponton bridge to land. And of course, this all
happens at nighttime, too. And raining, God, it
was miserable. But the welcoming we had, we went up
through the first, or maybe between the first and
29th division cemeteries. On the side of the hill
and we go up this trail in between them. Of course
the first and the 29th, they lost 80 to 90 percent of
their people on that original landing operation.
God, I never saw so many crows in all my life.
I told the colonel, I said, this is a hell of a
welcoming we're getting. I remember saying that
to him. But we went into Omaha and turned back
around towards Congress. And Vallone stayed
there for two or three days, and then we moved down
south and got into the fighting down towards St.
Mary Glees and St. Louis. into the pocket. They
called it the pocket and then the breaking out of
the pocket that's when it turned back into towards
Brittany. Now what Army group are you with? Who is
the commanding general? We're in the Third Army,
General Patton's Army. We stayed in General
Patton's Army in the Third Army until
Oh, let me see here. We got out of there and got up.
What did you think of General Panton? Did you have
an opportunity to meet him? Well, no. To talk to him
like you and I are talking, I never did. I've been in
a lot of conferences with him. He was a tremendous
person, a tremendous commander. He was a great
soldier. He
was an outstanding leader. I admired him
tremendously as a man and a person and a soldier.
Any wrongs that he had, if he had any wrongs, were
covering up an inferiority complex that he had, in
my humble opinion. He was
not too large a stature man.
And he had been bypassed two or three times in Army
promotions. And he had an inferiority complex, in
my humble opinion, about this. He was a vulgar man,
but a deeply religious Christian man. And his
vulgarity to me was a smoke screen.
That's my
analysis of General Patton. He was a great
soldier. What was it like sitting in conferences
with him? Well, he was a very, very... Ship shape is
bang, bang, bang. I'm sure he had briefed his
people beforehand, his intimate staff, of what he
was going to do, and it was just a laying out
orientation as far as his staff conference was
concerned at my level.
I'm sure that his personal staff me and his exec,
his jeet, one, two, three, and four, those people,
immediate close staff. He was a hell of a work for
us, because he was so demanding. But at my level,
we'd come in and get instructions and pick up
overlays, which you operated off of, overlay on a
map. And he was a typical high-type executive. He
says, this is what we're going to do, and pointed
out on the map, and this is the reason why. And the
17th Division is going to do this, and the 29th
Division is going to do that, and the 4th Division
is going to do this. And this is what we could do. And
we could do it in so many hours or so many days. And
that's it. And that was his final instruction to
his division commanders and corps commanders
and, of course, I'm Lieutenant Colonel sitting on
the back of the peanut roost. But he was a great
soldier. You can't take it away from him. And I
don't know anybody that didn't have the greatest
admiration and respect for him. He was a driver.
Oh, yeah. But I've seen him down in the firefights
where lieutenants ought to be in. And he down there
called them. Sergeant, this section chief is
telling him, watch it, tanks coming off to the left
or coming off to the right, and here he comes
through the bushes, get him. Goddamn, get him,
Sergeant, get him, get him. Boom. It was like this.
But that was General Patton.
He was a great soldier, a great person. And I'll say
this, he died like he wanted to die. He's still on
tops, and...
He was a dedicated soldier and he delivered the
goods. And I'm satisfied that we got out of that war
many months sooner than had he not been there. And
months means many American lives. Had he not been
there. Because he had the capabilities of
demanding and making people like it.
I don't know what more to say about men. Now, as the
XO of the Field Artillery Group, tell me about that
job. Well, that job, the group has from normally
three to up to five or six battalions of artillery.
It's like a regiment. made up normally of three or
four battalions. So Patton would say something
like, he needs so many guns here or so many over
there, and he'd tell your colonel and your colonel
and give you the word. That's right, he'd put them
there. And we were an Army artillery assigned to
corps. We operated through corps, but our
direction was by Army, meaning the 3rd Army at that
time. And they would concentrate our field
artillery wherever they needed the firepower. he
could see from his intelligence that they could
have trouble here, they could have trouble there.
And he would send extra artillery to supplement
his own firepower. And that was our job. His
supportive role, combat supportive role. And my
job as battalion, as a group exec, was to keep my
commanding uh commander informed of the status of
everything in his group plus the daily contact
with those people because the old man has always
gone to conference or something and he'd tell me
check on this check on that i want this done i go do it
and i i know the preparations are going on from
visiting the motor parks or the gun parks I know the
supply situation. I know the food situation, the
ammunition situation, everything else, to give
him the answers. I'd go to him and tell him when it
was adequate or it was, we had what we called a
combat load, which is a day's fire that you carry
with you all the time, meaning a day's ammunition.
And I could tell him tonight that we had one day's
Fire, three days fire, we've got a half day's fire.
And he knew whether to build a fire under the
ordinance up at Third Army, for instance, we need
some more bullets. Or we need some more groceries.
Or say, how about our PX supplies? We haven't been
getting them lately. Meaning cigarettes, and
chewing gum, and beer, and this kind of thing. So
you were keeping the Army moving forward, then?
That's right. That's right. But it was a fine job.
It was a good training job. And
I did a good job for him. And consequently- Is that
why you were promoted to CO then? No, I was
lieutenant colonel. But you were still promoted
to the commanding officer of the 777. Well, I
wasn't promoted. I was transferred because The
777FA battalion lost him. He screwed up, is what he
did. Battalion commander. And the colonel sent me
down there as his replacement. And so I was still a
lieutenant colonel. Right. But would you
consider coming back, though, to your own command
of promotions? I got a command. Well, surely it's a
promotion in a sense, but you think of promotions
meaning a promotion in grade. It's a delegation of
a lot more responsibility. So I had the 777 FAA
battalion, and I stayed there for, oh gosh, I don't
know how long. And then I got the 745
FAA battalion, which was a heavy artillery, which
was 8-inch howitz battalion. And it required a
whole bunch more preparation and work and that
kind of things. What did you think of American
armaments during the Second World War compared to
the Germans? It was good. Of course, the German
armament was worn out. That's a better word than
wore out.
They didn't have the maintenance capabilities
and the replacement capabilities that we did.
They were good artillerymen. Their philosophy
was basically the same as ours of point targets.
And they were trained to shoot at a point target
rather than an area fire like the Russians. The
Russian artillery are not trained in point
targets at all. They're trained in area fire. And
they have artillery divisions, meaning a
division of nothing but artillerymen. They may
have 12, 15,000 artillerymen with maybe 500 guns.
And they neutralized an area, but they couldn't
hit a bull and maize with a base fiddle. They're not
trained that way. They don't have that
capabilities. The German army did until late in
the war. Their equipment was worn out. They didn't
have any replacement equipment. And our basement
story The experience that we had, when I was in
later from 777, I got to 745 at that time, which is
8-inch howitzer battalion. Finest artillery
piece made then and now, as far as artillery, fixed
artillery.
And we were running, of course, ammunition was a
big problem with them because 8-inch howitzers,
it's... Just big. Just a little bit larger than
155. 155
millimeters is roughly six inches. And
eight-inch high would be about 200 millimeters.
204, 5 millimeters, they called it each. And we
were going helter-skelter chasing Germans, and
they ran off and left a bunch of their equipment
because they didn't have Gasoline to hold it out.
Whereabouts was this? Well, this is in Germany.
This is deep in Germany. Okay, so we're in 1945 now.
We're in 1945.
Let's see. But this wasn't in France after you
landed. They still had the gasoline then. Oh,
yeah, they had gasoline then, or they were running
short on it. And what did you find when you picked up
their old pieces? Well. We overran them, and at
that time we were, because we'd broken through and
we fired practically all of our bullets, we were on
a ration of two rounds per battery per day. Is that
all? Two rounds. That's all we had. We may have had a
day's combat fire, but you can't tell at what time
of night the hell's going to break out and we need
it. So to keep our guns calibrated, and keep our map
coordinates fired in, we called it. We fired two
rounds per battery per day,
proving out the metrological information we got
and our survey data and all this kind of stuff.
And when we overran these 88s, we overran a
battalion of them. They were all in place.
ammunition stacked up beside pine trees, and
either the general or our colonel decided, the
Corps artillery officer or my group commander
decided that we'd do our harassing fire with 88s,
Save American Bullets. And you could use those? We
used them, yeah. But going down there and working
on them, You could have 20 mils of deflection air
worn out. We call it lost motion. That's the
artilleryman's phrase for loose joint, so to
speak. Like this doesn't fit snug, so it's got so
much lost motion in it.
You could raise and lower the tube of the gun 20 mils
of lost motion. No wonder they weren't so
accurate. Well, 20 mils at 10,000 yards is several
hundred yards. Sure. 1,000 yards maybe. And the
same thing in deflection. I'm sure some of those
guns had 30 mils deflection there in lost motion.
They could point this way and shoot this way.
And that's the condition we found the artillery
in. Now, this was late in the war. But
nevertheless, that's what they were using. They
didn't have the replacement capabilities that we
did. I mean, we get a weapon like that. If we had two
or three degrees loss of motion, we'd scrap it.
We'd junk it. And the easiest way to do that is to
lose it in battle. All it takes is a commander to
write a certificate that it's lost in battle, and
that's it. You don't have to mess with it, as far as
accountability is concerned. and you go get your
new one. And that's the way that worked. It saved
you lots of problems and it kept your fire
accurate. Now tell me about the 94th Division
artillery, which you also learned your next
assignment. All right. The next thing that
happened after I got rid of the...
At the end of the war, I was the C.O. of the 745th
African Battalion, the armistice, or the D-Day, I
mean the... In May 1945. Yeah, the V.E. Day.
And... But before we get to that, can I change the
topic for just a second? I'd like to ask you a
question about going into Germany. Yeah. What did
you think of the German people when you went into
Germany, and how did they act toward you? Well, the
German people, we didn't see too
many Germans, because we were in smaller towns.
Any German people we saw were old people, decrepit
people. thoroughly beaten people, kick-dog
people, if that's a good way to say it. Anybody that
was able physically moved back as the German army
moved back.
Invariably, because we were a
separate army unit, we got the least desirable
Of course, they give a division the first
priority, and he takes the biggest town to his
division headquarters, and your separate
troops, or meaning the Army Artillery Battalion
sitting out here, and the squeeze of a big goose
egg, if that's a good way to put it. And we may have a
little settlement, or we may not. We've had leased
accommodations and a leased of facilities. off of
the land. And the little towns that we were
invariably put in, and I guess we got in some towns
of 5,000 people, you know. But Germany was made up
of very small towns, basically, little farming
community towns. Those people fell back with
their troops or fled in front of their troops,
except for this one or two old men or old woman and an
old man or a husband or a boyfriend or something. A
lot of them put their cattle and all up in the attic.
And he was left there to feed and water the cattle,
thinking eventually, and they believed, that the
Americans would be driven out and they'd come back
to their homes. And we didn't have any dealings
with them except as conquerors. Was there a lot of
hatred? I beg your pardon? Was there a lot of
hatred? No, no, no. You didn't see any. I didn't
experience any of that at all. For instance,
I picked up a Telefunken TV out of a bombed out house
or shot up house. The part of it was still intact. A
TV? I don't mean TV, a radio. Sure, a telephone
radio. And of course it had shortwave on it. And I
could in turn tune in to Axis Annie and Berlin and
all on it. And I just, when we moved out of this
little house, I just took it with me. Well, sooner
or later I plugged it in to a German 220 volt line.
The Germans have got five or six different kind of
electricity in every town. Got 110, 60 cycle, and
110, 100 cycle, 220 DC and AC, 60 cycle, and you plug
in, you test it on the wrong plug wire, boom, she
gone. But anyway, I blew out a fuse on the radio. And
I went to little old, We'd call it
a... Repairman? No, no, no. General Mercantile
Store in Old Town. You know, he carries oil and he
carries groceries and he carries bicycle parts
and buggy parts. And I'm sure he carried a few
radios because at one time he didn't have any when I
went in there. But he had a Telefunken sign out on
his on his window glass. They got Coca-Cola signs
and Maytag washing machine signs and telephone
signs. And I went in there and had this little fuse
about this long, about half as big around as a
pencil. And I went in and showed it to the lady. She
came hobbling out. showed it to her and held my hand
and she looked at it, wee, wee, and she went and got
one somewhere and came back and I tried to pay her in
American script, that's all the money I had,
American GI money, they paid us in script. And she
wouldn't take it.
She just wouldn't take the money at all. So. There
wasn't much hatred then? No, no, there wasn't any
hatred. They wanted to incur the good favor of the
Americans because they had been told that we were
an atrocious army and to hate us. But that didn't
hold water and got to dealing with them.
Down in Austria, for instance,
I took over an area. And of course, I went. and made
my acquaintance with the burgomaster, so you got
in a little town. And I befriended him. He had some
truck there that he'd used in the city business,
and they didn't have any diesel. And I gave him a
drum of diesel
to do his burgomaster business.
He took me hunting. Took me chamois hunting, you
know. What kind of hunting? Chamois. What are
those? Oh, they are antelope type of animals. You
know what a chamois skin is. Yeah, right. Well,
he's an antelope. They only grow in the Alps, the
Swiss and the Bavarian Alps. He ranges up just
below the snow line, high altitude. Did you get
one? Yeah, I got a nice one. And, of course, I made a
nice shot on him, and that word got out, you know.
But I
helped him and, in turn, helped myself because I
was the civilian authority over this area. And I
used him. And I just told him what I wanted done and
how we clamped him. a curfew on down, and I expected
him to keep it. Okay, now this is when you were Chief
of Public Works in the Utility Office? No, that's
before I got there. Oh, okay, so you're right now.
That's when I was leaving the 745
F.A. Battalion at the end of the war, just at the end
of the war, and we got moved down to Holtheim.
Austria, and theoretically, preparing to
go into an invasion of the Japanese islands. We
completely re-equip, we star gauge an artillery
piece, which is internally measuring the lands,
which are the grooves in the rifle. And if they
weren't so far away, you'd get a new barrel, see.
And we had stargazed our equipment, and that's a
chore. We'd gotten some new guns in. We'd gotten
rid of all of our high point people, meaning people
that had so many months of service in combat. And
those people that had gotten hurt, they got so many
points for getting hurt, and they got so many
points for being promoted, and they got so many
points for a month, and that kind of thing. And we
got rid of all the high point people and got in all
new low point men and officers. And we were
supposed to, well, we actually had shipped our
equipment to Marseilles. Our train was there
waiting, noticed that a boat was waiting on us, and
they'd ship you to the ports because they didn't
want you overcrowding the ports. And our train was
there, and I'd fix them or my people had fixed up my
caboose. Boy, it was a luxurious penthouse. They
moved in some beds in there for me and my exec. And it
was fixed up. And
the J Day caught us in this transition. So we
immediately knew that we weren't going. And I'd
been given the top secret information. to the Far
East for the invasion of the Japanese islands,
home islands. And so,
when I got the top secret word on that deal, of
course, at the exact moment, I called my staff
together and told them, read the order, that V-J
Day was such and such a time, and we could
celebrate, so we celebrated. We had a good one. We
picked up a bunch of cases of champagne and we
celebrated with champagne. Every man in my
battalion got a bottle of champagne, free. And
every officer got all he could drink. I'm sure some
of the men got more of it because we had some
leftover. But we celebrated VJ Day in all-time
Austria. And it was very few days after that I got
transferred from the 745 F.A. Battalion to U.S.
Forces in Austria, which were in Vienna.
And there's where I
got into real staff work, working for General
Clark, Mark Clark. Oh, really? What kind of man was
he? He was a very fine person. He was a strictly
administrator.
I have no idea about his combat capabilities
because I didn't see him combat. He was a
tremendous administrator.
It's 5 o'clock. How long do you want to stay here?
Well,
why don't you just answer that question about
General Clark and then we'll go and we'll start off
tomorrow. All right. I worked for him for, well,
five months. Mm-hmm. and I was in several
conferences. He was the CG of U.S. force in Austria
and he had a general, Major General Brand as his
exec and a Major General Salzman who was my boss. I
was the,
they called it, the public utility officer. I was
an engineer and set up an engineering section. And
General Clark either realized or was told to
reestablish the communication systems, meaning
the power and telephone and trains and all. The
power lines are like our power poles. They carry
telephones and juice. Now, Austria runs on
electricity. Basically, it's an electrified
country. They have power stations, both hydro and
coal-fired. Had some oil-fired, but they didn't
have any oil in those days. It was all coal-fired
generation stations. And our job was to get those
stations back Working order. Working order, and
the transmission lines in working order so that
they could pipe juice to all these towns and to
their industry. Because General Eisenhower or
maybe Mr. Truman recognized
that they had to get those people back to working.
Sure, really. And forget their problems and get
them to doing something, to working again. And so
my job, General Brand took and General Solomon
gave me my responsibility of checking the power
stations in Austria to see if it was running, when
we could get it running, and if not, why not.
I was the American representative on a
quadripartite level, meaning I was dealing with a
British brigadier a French Brigadier, a Russian
Major General, and myself a Lieutenant Colonel.
And I was the key
man in that group because we had the capabilities
of transportation, telephone, radio, fuel, and
all that, and those other people did not have it or
didn't want to give it up for this chore. Let's talk
about that first thing tomorrow. All right.